# Investigating epimutations in _Neurospora crassa_

We have previously performed a mutation accumulation experiment using the filamentous fungus _Neurospora crassa_. In this study we investigated spontaneous methylation changes in the MA-lines. First we performed bisulphite sequencing to determine methylated cytosines in these lines. We used the program Methimpute to to determine methylation status of each cytosine. Then we determined methylated regions in the genome using jDMR. To estimate rates of spontaneous methylation changes we ran the program AlphaBeta for both single cytosines and differentially methylated regions (DMRs).

Sequencing data related to this project has been deposited to European nucleotide archive, accession number: [PRJEB108830](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ena/browser/view/PRJEB108830) and ChIP-seq data has been deposited to NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus database, accession number: [GSE313506](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE313506)

The processing of different types of sequencing data are described below.

Note that the original scripts were mostly run on the Finnish CSC computer cluster that uses the SLURM batch job system. As such to make the scripts work on your computing environment you may need to modify the control commands accordingly. As well as input and ouput folders, program directories etc. of course.

## Processing bisulphite sequencing data

Scripts for processing bisulfite-seq data to generate methylomes are in the folder ./WGBS

## Processing Nanopore sequencing data

Scripts for processing Nanopore sequencing data to generate methylomes are in the folder ./nanopore

## Subsetting methimpute files

Scripts for subsetting the methylome files generated by methimpute are in the folder ./subset
Annotations to define the subset regions are in the folder ./annotations

## Inferring differentially methylated regions (DMRs)

Scripts for inferring DMRs are in the folder ./jDMR

## Subsetting single cytosine and DMR methylomes

Scripts for subsetting single cytosine and DMR methylomes are in the folder ./subsets

## Calculating methylation divergence for the MA pedigree samples

Scripts for calculating methylation divergence for the MA samples for single cytosines and DMRs and for different subsets of the genome are in ./pedigree_div

The output of the divergence calculations are in ./Illumina_ABdata for the WGBS data and in ./nanoporeABdata for the Nanopore data

## Fitting models of epimutation accumulation using AlphaBeta

Scripts for fitting epimutation accumulation models are in ./ABmodelfits/WGBS for the WGBS data and ./ABmodelfits/Nanopore for the Nanopore data. 

### Proportions of unmethylated cytosines and DMR bins in the ancestors of the MA pedigree

Estimates of the parameter p0uu, the proportion of unmethylated cytosines (or DMR bins) in the ancestor of the MA pedigree are in folder ./ABmodelfits/unmethprop

### Output of the models

Output of the AB neutral haploi models is available in ./modeldata

## Processing ChIP-seq data

Scripts for processing ChIP-seq data are in the folder ./Chipseq

## Data analysis

Scripts, functions, and intermediate output data used for data analysis are in folder ./analysis
